Getting started tutorial (#923)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/tutorials/get-started.md

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/tutorials/get-started/
description: Getting started with Alloy
title: Get started with Alloy
weight: 10
---

> ## Get started with {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Get started with {{% param "PRODUCT_NAME" %}}
```

We have to use `%` syntax in the headings.... so this change will have to be reverted.

The `%` controls when in the build process something is parsed, The `%` ensures the param shortcode is rendered before being passed to the markdown processor (which generates the .TableOfContent variable). If we use `<` and `>` for a shortcode in a heading, the variable substitution happens at the wrong stage. If we don't do this, Hugo inserts `hahahaha` in t he URL and anchors.

tl;dr: Use `%` in headings and `<` and `>` in body text.

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/tutorials/get-started/
description: Getting started with Alloy
title: Get started with Alloy
weight: 10
---

## Get started with {{% param "PRODUCT_NAME" %}}

This tutorial will walk you through configuring Alloy to collect logs from your local machine and report logs to Loki running in the local Grafana Stack. This process will enable you to query and visualize the logs sent to Loki using the Grafana dashboard.

To follow this tutorial, you must have a basic understanding of Alloy and telemetry collection in general. You should also be familiar with Prometheus and PromQL, Loki and LogQL, and basic Grafana navigation. You don't need to know about the 

> {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} [configuration syntax][configuration] concepts.

Author: I think it makes more sense to call it a stack; that's what it is; also I'd rather not get into enumerating everything that's in it, because that will get long (there are several components, and most aren't relevant in this short context).

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/tutorials/get-started/
description: Getting started with Alloy
title: Get started with Alloy
weight: 10
---

> 

Reviewer 2: Under the ##Get Started with Alloy section, I propose that we replace this entire section with the following to give the readers an overview of what exactly they will be accomplishing after following this tutorial. 

This tutorial will walk you through configuring Alloy to collect logs from your local machine and report logs to Loki running in the local Grafana Stack. This process will enable you to query and visualize the logs sent to Loki using the Grafana dashboard. 

To follow this tutorial, you must have a basic understanding of [Alloy](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/) and telemetry collection in general. You should also be familiar with Prometheus and PromQL, Loki and LogQL, and basic Grafana navigation. You don’t need to know about the Alloy configuration syntax concepts.

## Prerequisites

This first tutorial requires a Linux, Unix, or Mac environment with Docker installed.
The examples run on a single host so that you can run them on your laptop or in a Virtual Machine.
You are encouraged to try the examples using a `config.alloy` file and experiment with the examples yourself.

> 

Reviewer 2: I propose we replace this entire section with the following sentence. The other info included in the original section has been placed in other parts of the document where it's more relevant. 

This tutorial requires a Linux, Unix, or Mac environment with Docker installed.

> ## Install {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} and start the service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Install {{% param "PRODUCT_NAME" %}} and start the service
```

### Linux

Follow the instructions on the [Linux Install] page for the steps for several popular
Linux distributions.  

{{< admonition type="tip" >}}
Make sure to follow the optional install step to enable the UI, we will be referring to it in this tutorial.
{{< /admonition >}}

> Once you have completed this, follow the instructions to [Run on Linux] using `systemctl`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have completed this, follow the instructions to [Run on Linux][] using `systemctl`.
```

Syntactically not required, but we should include the second `[]` fro consistency.  Same applies throughout the rest of the topic.

> ### Mac

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### macOS
```

> Follow the instructions on the [MacOS Install] page for homebrew instructions. Once you have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the instructions on the [macOS Install] page for Homebrew instructions. Once you have
```

> completed this, follow the instructions to [Run on MacOS] which will start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
completed this, follow the instructions to [Run on macOS] which will start
```

{{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} as a Homebrew service.

## Set up a local Grafana instance

You can use the following Docker Compose file to set up a local Grafana instance alongside Loki and Prometheus which are pre-configured as datasources. You can run and experiment with the examples on your local system. In this tutorial,
{{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} will report logs to the loki running in this stack, and we can use Grafana to query and

> visualize them.

Reviewer 2: I propose we replace this section with the following. The other info included in the original section has been relocated to other parts of the document for a better flow and ease of understanding. 

To enable Grafana Alloy to write data to Loki running in the local Grafana Stack, we will use the following Docker Compose file to set up a local Grafana instance alongside Loki and Prometheus which are pre-configured as data sources.

          editable: false
        EOF
        /run.sh
    image: grafana/grafana:11.0.0
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
```

After running `docker-compose up`, open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) in your browser to view the Grafana UI. In some newer

> docker installs, this command may be run as `docker compose up` without the dash character.

Author: your question is reasonable and has answers but I really really don't want to answer it because the answer is different per OS.  It's much easier to be like, "Just try both commands".  To make matters worse, newer installs per OS (which expect "docker compose") will work with "docker-compose" but others won't.

> docker installs, this command may be run as `docker compose up` without the dash character.

Reviewer: I did some digging and it seems like docker-compose is a deprecated v1... and docker compose is the newer v2.  https://docs.docker.com/compose/migrate/  

So.. my suggestion is to use the "current" v2 command as the primary step content... and offer `docker-compose` as an alternative if `docker compose` fails.

## Configure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}

Once the local Grafana instance has been set up, the next step is to give detailed instructions to Alloy on which logs we want to scrape, how we want to process that data, and where we want the data sent. This is done through `config.alloy` file which contains components with instructions for Alloy to execute. Our configuration will connect components into a workflow.

The examples run on a single host so that you can run them on your laptop or in a Virtual Machine. You are encouraged to try the examples using a `config.alloy` file and experiment with the examples yourself.

For the following steps, create a file called `config.alloy` in your current working directory. 
{{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} has a feature that allows us to "hot reload" a configuration from a file. In a later 
step, we will copy this file to where {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} will pick it up, and be able to reload without restarting 
the system service.

### First Component: Log files

> Put this component into the top of the `config.alloy` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paste this component into the top of the `config.alloy` file:
```

```alloy
local.file_match "local_files" {
    path_targets = [{"__path__" = "/var/log/*.log"}]
    sync_period = "5s"
}
```

> In {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}'s configuration language, this creates a [local.file_match] component named `local_files` with an attribute that tells {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} which files to source, and to check every 5 seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This component creates a [local.file_match][] component named `local_files` with an attribute that tells {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} which files to source, and to check every 5 seconds.
```

### Second Component: Scraping

> Put this component next in the `config.alloy` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paste this component next in the `config.alloy` file:
```

```alloy
loki.source.file "log_scrape" {
    targets    = local.file_match.local_files.targets
    forward_to = [loki.write.grafana_loki.receiver]
    tail_from_end = true
}
```

> This configuration creates a [loki.source.file] component named `log_scrape`, and
> shows the pipeline concept of {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} in action:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration creates a [loki.source.file][] component named `log_scrape`, and shows the pipeline concept of {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} in action. The `log.scrape` component does the following:
```

> 1. It applies to the `local_files` component (its "source" or target)
> 2. It forwards the logs it scrapes to the "receiver" of another component called `grafana_loki` that we will define next
> 3. It provides extra attributes and options, in this case, we will tail log files from the end and not ingest the entire
> past history

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It applies to the `local_files` component (its "source" or target).
1. It forwards the logs it scrapes to the "receiver" of another component called `grafana_loki` that you will define next.
1. It provides extra attributes and options, in this case, you will tail log files from the end and not ingest the entire past history.
```

What "applies"... is this an action from the component? I'm not sure what the first item means here.

### Third Component: Write Logs to Loki

> Place this component last in your configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paste this component last in your configuration file:
```

```alloy
loki.write "grafana_loki" {
  endpoint {
    url = "http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push"

    // basic_auth {
    //  username = "admin"
    //  password = "admin"
    // }
  }
}
```

> We create a [loki.write] component named `grafana_loki` that points to `http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push`. This completes a simple configuration pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This last component creates a [loki.write][] component named `grafana_loki` that points to `http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push`.
This completes the simple configuration pipeline.
```

{{< admonition type="tip" >}}

> Notice that the `basic_auth` is commented out. Our local `docker-compose` stack does not require it; we include it in this example
> to show how you can configure auth for other environments. For further auth options, consult the [loki.write] component reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `basic_auth` is commented out because the local `docker-compose` stack doesn't require it. 
It is included in this example to show how you can configure authorization for other environments.
For further authorization options, refer to the [loki.write][] component reference.

[loki.write]: ../../reference/components/loki.write/
```

    //  password = "admin"
    // }
  }
}
```

This last component creates a [loki.write][] component named `grafana_loki` that points to `http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push`.
This completes the simple configuration pipeline.

{{< admonition type="tip" >}}
The `basic_auth` is commented out because the local `docker compose` stack doesn't require it. 
It is included in this example to show how you can configure authorization for other environments.
For further authorization options, refer to the [loki.write][] component reference.

{{< /admonition >}}

This connects directly to the Loki instance running in the Docker container.

## Reload the Configuration

Copy your local `config.alloy` file into the default configuration file location, which depends on your OS.

{{< code >}}

```macos
sudo cp config.alloy $(brew --prefix)/etc/alloy/config.alloy
```

```linux
sudo cp config.alloy /etc/alloy/config.alloy
```

{{< /code >}}

Finally, call the reload endpoint to alert {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} to the configuration change without the need
for restarting the system service.

```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:12345/-/reload
```

{{< admonition type="tip" >}}

> This step uses the Alloy UI, which is exposed only on `localhost` port `12345`. If you chose to run Alloy in
> a dockerized environment, you will need to expose this to other addresses, for example via the argument
> `--server.http.listen-addr=0.0.0.0:12345` when running {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}
> For more information refer to [debugging your configuration]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step uses the Alloy UI, which is exposed on `localhost` port `12345`.
If you chose to run Alloy in a Docker container, make sure you use the `--server.http.listen-addr=0.0.0.0:12345` argument.
If you don’t use this argument, the [debugging UI][debug] won’t be available outside of the Docker container.

[debug]: ../../tasks/debug/#alloy-ui
```

Aligning the text with the note here: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/get-started/install/docker/#run-a-linux-docker-container

          editable: false
        EOF
        /run.sh
    image: grafana/grafana:11.0.0
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
```

Run `docker compose up` to start your Docker container and open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) in your browser to view the Grafana UI.

 {{< admonition type="note" >}}
If you the following error when you start your Docker container, `docker: 'compose' is not a docker command`, use the command `docker-compose up` to start your Docker container.
 {{< /admonition >}}

> ## Configure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configure {{% param "PRODUCT_NAME" %}}
```

Missed this in earlier reviews. We need to use `%` in the shortcode syntax when they are used in headings.

Once the local Grafana instance is set up, the next step is to configure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}.
You use components in the `config.alloy` file to tell {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} which logs you want to scrape, how you want to process that data, and where you want the data sent.

The examples run on a single host so that you can run them on your laptop or in a Virtual Machine.
You can try the examples using a `config.alloy` file and experiment with the examples yourself.

For the following steps, create a file called `config.alloy` in your current working directory. 
If you have enabled the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} UI, you can "hot reload" a configuration from a file.
In a later step, you will copy this file to where {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} will pick it up, and be able to reload without restarting the system service.

> ### First Component: Log files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### First component: Log files
```

Paste this component into the top of the `config.alloy` file:

```alloy
local.file_match "local_files" {
    path_targets = [{"__path__" = "/var/log/*.log"}]
    sync_period = "5s"
}
```

> This component creates a [local.file_match][] component named `local_files` with an attribute that tells {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} which files to source, and to check every 5 seconds.

Reviewer 3: should this clarify what is being checked every 5 seconds? For example, "and to check for new files every 5 seconds"?

Author: yes, can be more clear.  Will commit fix.

> ### Second Component: Scraping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Second component: Scraping
```

Paste this component next in the `config.alloy` file:

```alloy
loki.source.file "log_scrape" {
    targets    = local.file_match.local_files.targets
    forward_to = [loki.write.grafana_loki.receiver]
    tail_from_end = true
}
```

> This configuration creates a [loki.source.file][] component named `log_scrape`, and shows the pipeline concept of {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} in action. The `log.scrape` component does the following:

Reviewer 3: `log.scrape` is a typo here; but I'm not sure if you meant `loki.source.file` or `log_scrape`: 

```suggestion
This configuration creates a [loki.source.file][] component named `log_scrape`, and shows the pipeline concept of {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} in action. The `log_scrape` component does the following:
```

> 1. It applies to the `local_files` component (its "source" or target).

Reviewer 3: The usage of applies here is throwing me off a bit, as I'm reading "it applies" as an action performed by the log_scrape component. What does it mean for log_scrape to apply to local_files?

Author: not sure what to do to clarify wording here.  The reason we're taking it slow is to explain interconnectivity of the config component.  Here, "applies to" means that because local_files is the source, this component applies to that input.

Reviewer 3: Given we're explaining interconnectivity, maybe "connects?" 

> It connects to the `local_files` component (its "source" or target).

> 1. It applies to the `local_files` component (its "source" or target).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It uses the `local_files` component as its "source" or target.
```

Could we change the wording and give it a clear action?

1. It forwards the logs it scrapes to the "receiver" of another component called `grafana_loki` that you will define next.
1. It provides extra attributes and options, in this case, you will tail log files from the end and not ingest the entire past history.

> ### Third Component: Write Logs to Loki

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Third component: Write logs to Loki
```

Paste this component last in your configuration file:

```alloy
loki.write "grafana_loki" {
  endpoint {
    url = "http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push"

    // basic_auth {
    //  username = "admin"
    //  password = "admin"
    // }
  }
}
```

This last component creates a [loki.write][] component named `grafana_loki` that points to `http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push`.
This completes the simple configuration pipeline.

{{< admonition type="tip" >}}
The `basic_auth` is commented out because the local `docker compose` stack doesn't require it. 
It is included in this example to show how you can configure authorization for other environments.
For further authorization options, refer to the [loki.write][] component reference.

{{< /admonition >}}

This connects directly to the Loki instance running in the Docker container.

> ## Reload the Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Reload the configuration
```

Copy your local `config.alloy` file into the default configuration file location, which depends on your OS.

{{< code >}}

```macos
sudo cp config.alloy $(brew --prefix)/etc/alloy/config.alloy
```

```linux
sudo cp config.alloy /etc/alloy/config.alloy
```

{{< /code >}}

> Finally, call the reload endpoint to alert {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} to the configuration change without the need

Reviewer 3: nit: I wonder if "alert Alloy to" may be a loaded term in our space. Have we considered "notify Alloy of?"

for restarting the system service.

```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:12345/-/reload
```

{{< admonition type="tip" >}}
This step uses the Alloy UI, which is exposed on `localhost` port `12345`.
If you chose to run Alloy in a Docker container, make sure you use the `--server.http.listen-addr=0.0.0.0:12345` argument.
If you don’t use this argument, the [debugging UI][debug] won’t be available outside of the Docker container.

[debug]: ../../tasks/debug/#alloy-ui
{{< /admonition >}}

The alternative to using this endpoint is to reload the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} configuration, which can
be done as follows:

{{< code >}}

```macos
brew services restart alloy
```

```linux
sudo systemctl reload alloy
```

{{< /code >}}

> ## Inspect your Configuration in the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} UI

Reviewer 3: @clayton-cornell Should configuration not capitalized here for following the sentence-case convention?

Reviewer: You're right. I missed it in the review.

> ## Inspect your Configuration in the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Inspect your configuration in the {{% param "PRODUCT_NAME" %}} UI
```

Open [http://localhost:12345] and click the Graph tab at the top.
The graph should look similar to the following:

{{< figure src="/media/docs/alloy/tutorial/healthy-config.png" alt="Logs reported by Alloy in Grafana" >}}

The UI allows you to see a visual representation of the pipeline you built with your {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} component configuration.
We can see that the components are healthy, and you are ready to go.

> ## Log into Grafana and Explore Loki Logs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Log in to Grafana and explore Loki logs
```

> Open [http://localhost:3000/explore] to access Explore feature in Grafana.

Reviewer 3: Markdown tip: you can use `<http://localhost:3000/explore>` to create a link and avoid needing to add the link definition below.

          editable: false
        EOF
        /run.sh
    image: grafana/grafana:11.0.0
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
```

After running `docker-compose up`, open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) in your browser to view the Grafana UI.

## Configure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}

Alloy is configured through `config.alloy` file which contains a set of components. Components do basic things 
like identifying which logs we want to scrape, how we want to process them, and where we will send them. 

> Our configuration will connect components into a workflow.

Reviewer 2: I propose we replace the lines 102-104 with the following:

Once the local Grafana instance has been set up, the next step is to give detailed instructions to Alloy on which logs we want to scrape, how we want to process that data, and where we want the data sent. This is done through `config.alloy` file which contains components with instructions for Alloy to execute. Our configuration will connect components into a workflow. 

The examples run on a single host so that you can run them on your laptop or in a Virtual Machine. You are encouraged to try the examples using a `config.alloy` file and experiment with the examples yourself.

          editable: false
        EOF
        /run.sh
    image: grafana/grafana:11.0.0
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
```

> After running `docker-compose up`, open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) in your browser to view the Grafana UI. In some newer
> docker installs, this command may be run as `docker compose up` without the dash character.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run `docker compose up` to start your Docker container and open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) in your browser to view the Grafana UI.

 {{< admonition type="note" >}}
If you the following error when you start your Docker container, `docker: 'compose' is not a docker command`, use the command `docker-compose up` to start your Docker container.
 {{< /admonition >}}
```

Maybe we could use some text like this instead?

For further authorization options, refer to the [loki.write][] component reference.

[loki.write]: ../../reference/components/loki.write/
{{< /admonition >}}

This connects directly to the Loki instance running via `docker compose` from the earlier step.

## Reload the Configuration

Copy your local `config.alloy` file into the default configuration file location, which depends on your OS.

{{< code >}}

```macos
sudo cp config.alloy $(brew --prefix)/etc/alloy/config.alloy
```

```linux
sudo cp config.alloy /etc/alloy/config.alloy
```

{{< /code >}}

Finally, call the reload endpoint to alert {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} to the configuration change without the need
for restarting the system service.

```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:12345/-/reload
```

{{< admonition type="tip" >}}
If this step does not work for you, please note that in the install instructions, enabling it requires
one extra optional step for Linux, while this is enabled by default on MacOS.
{{< /admonition >}}

The alternative to using this endpoint is to reload the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} configuration, which can

> be done as follows:

Reviewer: Do we want to suggest this?  If yes, then can we simply link to the relevant docs?  My concern here is that someone not reading carefully (and users don't always read all the words) will reload the config and then restart the service. This might be better left out. This could be considered out of scope for the tutorial (we don't need to cover all possibilities.. just what's needed to follow through on things and get the desired result).
```

{{< code >}}

```macos
brew services restart alloy
```

```linux
sudo systemctl reload alloy
```

{{< /code >}}

## Inspect your Configuration in the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} UI

> Open [http://localhost:12345] and click the Graph tab at the top, which will show
> something similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open [http://localhost:12345] and click the Graph tab at the top.
The graph should look similar to the following:
```

{{< figure src="/media/docs/alloy/tutorial/healthy-config.png" alt="Logs reported by Alloy in Grafana" >}}

> The UI allows us to see a visual representation of the pipeline we are building with our {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}
> component configuration.  We can further see that the components are healthy, and we are ready to go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The UI allows you to see a visual representation of the pipeline you built with your {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} component configuration.
We can see that the components are healthy, and you are ready to go.
```

## Log into Grafana and Explore Loki Logs

> Open [http://localhost:3000/explore] to access Grafana's Explore feature. Select Loki as
> the data source, and click the "Label Browser" button to select a file that {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} as sent to Loki.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open [http://localhost:3000/explore] to access Explore feature in Grafana.
Select Loki as the data source and click the "Label Browser" button to select a file that {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} has sent to Loki.
```

> Here we can see that logs are flowing through to Loki as expected, and the end-to-end configuration was successful!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here you can see that logs are flowing through to Loki as expected, and the end-to-end configuration was successful!
```

{{< figure src="/media/docs/alloy/tutorial/loki-logs.png" alt="Logs reported by Alloy in Grafana" >}}

## Conclusion

> Congratulations, you have fully installed and configured {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}, and shipped logs from your local
> host to a Grafana stack. In the following tutorials, you will learn more about configuration concepts, metrics, and more
> advanced log scraping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Congratulations, you have fully installed and configured {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}, and sent logs from your local host to a Grafana stack.
In the following tutorials, you will learn more about configuration concepts, metrics, and more advanced log scraping.
```
